The State of Data
Bipin C. Desai
Concordia University
Montreal, QC, H3G 1M8
Canada
1 514 848 2424
BipinC.Desai@concordia.ca

Abstract
We are currently experiencing an extraordinary acceleration in the
growth rate of digital data. One of the reasons for this increase is
the digitization of virtually all communications and records. This
exponential growth is evidenced by the fact that the sum total of
data produced in the last year or two would exceed all data that
existed in digital form prior to that time. Just as the Industrial
Revolution created an entirely new urban way of life for what is
now more than half of the population of the planet, the Big Data
revolution will dramatically alter the ways in which we interact,
not only with each other but with all of the institutions which
mediate our lives. Our age has come to be known as the era of Big
Data and we are only beginning to understand its opportunities
and challenges. This position paper underlines some of these
emerging promises and threats, as well as their implications for
researchers and scientists across the database community.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
K.4.1 [Public Policy Issues]
privacy,
regulation,
transborder data flow, use/abuse of
General Terms
Design, Economics, Reliability, Experimentation, Security,
Human Factors, Legal Aspects.

Keywords
data, Big Data, data mining, privacy, security, social media and
networking, search engines

1. Introduction
Our time has come to be known as the age of Big Data [1]. As
with the birth of any new era, the inception of this new age is of
major cultural, scientific, political and economic significance. It is
this cultural or anthropological element that renders a reflection
on digital computing necessary, not only for the specialist but also
for the (now largely wirelessly) wired world as such. This cultural
milestone is, however, of particular interest to engineers insofar as
this revolution, like many of those that preceded it, has been made
possible by, among other important elements, the no doubt
essential ingredient of their ingenuity.

Therefore, in order to understand this new age in terms of some of
its origins, it is useful to briefly recall the history of data storage
From here on, this paper will examine more closely some specific
consequences of this new age which bear most directly on the
theory and practice of the data engineer, namely, the proliferation
of data and the novel possibilities it affords.

2. How Data Got Big

Though humans have recorded data in various forms over many
centuries such recording has, until recently, been stored in an
analog format [2]. With the invention of the magnetic tape in the
mid 1940s, the recording of and manipulation of data became
possible since it allowed for the storing of analog and later digital
data accessible in sequential mode. Magnetic tape was followed
by magnetic drums and thence by magnetic disks with greater and
greater data storage capacity and faster and faster access time.
These devices made it possible to access vast swathes of data in
random order, hence allowing storing, accessing and processing of
larger and larger amounts of data.

The electro-mechanical digital computers which started appearing
around late 1930’s were quickly replaced by electronic devices
with integrated circuits. Increased density of the circuitry was
achieved by higher and higher levels of miniaturization and
integration resulting in faster and smaller digital computer.
[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computer] This set the stage for
today’s concentration of processing power and data, making it
possible to quickly process immense amounts of data gathered
from multiple sources, the so-called Big Data, in a fraction of a
second and derive interesting results.

Over the past half century database technologies have continued
to evolve, from the first one reported to be IDS released by GE
running on GE235 computers [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Database]. Along with the advances in hardware, a number of data
models have been developed. The first was the hierarchical model
with IBM’s IMS, most prominently and widely used in the 1960s
and beyond. The network model was proposed as a replacement,
followed by the relational model, which, though it appeared in
1970s, was slow to catch on, becoming dominant only in the last
decade of the twentieth century. It is now the most common
model for new applications. The object model which was
introduced in the 80s has not caught on for database application.
Instead, the use of the object-relation model has bridged the
mismatch between many existing application using the relational
model and new needs where the object model is desired.
However, the genesis of Big Data truly began with the evolution
of the world wide web, which at its inception, was only one
application of the internet among many. It is with the widespread
adoption of the web that web-based applications began to
proliferate, and it is principally these that have, in just over a
decade, created the avalanche of data which is driving current
economic and social phenomena and the novel issues which
surround them.

3.1 Search engines

3. The Web Tsunami

As we know the early search engines are extinct(2014). They are
replaced by today systems, which have become corporations with,
globally, the largest capitalizations. These search engines and
soon to be released web based social networks (online social
networks - OSN) have become the starting point for most internet
interaction today.

In the early days of the search engines a number of tests were
done to determine the precision and recall of these systems [9],
[10], [11]. The result of the first two series of tests illustrated that
these search engines were not too developed and their recall and
precision were fairly poor and the number of documents missed
was considerable. The third tests, marked by the exit of veteran
search engines from the early days of the web, as well as the
beginnings of one which dominates today’s search market.
However, the results of these tests illustrate that the newer search
engines were still far from perfect. Figures 1 and 2 summarize the
recall and precision for these three series of tests.

Developed initially by and for scientists, the internet had been in
use for more than a decade when the web was developed. The
HTTP protocol to transmit the web traffic was an application of
the internet protocol. Due to the lack of widespread technical
skills the general population was locked out of the internet. The
web with its graphical browser overcame this difficulty, making
the internet available to the ordinary user.
The extent and the potential of the web was quickly recognized;
and the overwhelming amount of interest shown in the WWW by
technical people and the business community alike was already
evidenced by the over subscription to the first few meetings of the
WWW conference. The first of such meetings, held in Geneva in
May 1994, followed quickly by another in Chicago (Oct 1994)
and in Darmstadt in (April 1995) laid some of the foundational
ideas and outlined many of the promises which would allow for
monetizing the internet via the web. These and other initiatives
led to the dot-com craze towards the end of the twentieth century,
as well as the accompanying financial bubble which led to the
sobering realization that the web required more ‘know-how’ to
become profitable.


As early as 1945, in an article published in the Atlantic Monthly,
Vannevar Bush put forward the idea of sharing knowledge
electronically [3]. It took close to half a century for this idea to
materialize in the form of the world-wide web [4].


The priorities for the WWW communities and the need for
‘navigation’ through it were addressed early in two workshops
[5], [6]. The concept of navigating through the web and the early
search engines were discussed in Darmstadt [7] and an idea of
virtual library to fulfill the promise of shared information was
presented during the America in the Age of Information forum
held in Bethesda, Maryland [8].


The web-search environment of those early years would hardly be
recognizable today. In 1994, one of the first GUI browsers,
Mosaic, had 97% of web-browser traffic. Netscape Navigator,
created by Mosaic developers, quickly displaced it. The game
heated up with Microsoft releasing their Internet Explorer (IE)
while IBM came up with their own, short-lived browser.
Integrated into the then current Windows operating system, IE
gradually gained a third of the share, becoming the favoured
browser of the new Windows web surfers. Currently there are five
leading browsers with the respective share of the user base:
Chrome (37%), Internet Explorer (21%), Firefox (17%), Safari
(11%), Opera (4%) with the others browsers making up the rest of
the share.


During the Darmstadt workshop the idea of financing search
engines was discussed in terms of adding small paid
announcements in the margins of web pages at a cost of a few
milli-cents per display. The concept of tailoring the announcement
to the user was solely based on the current search terms. During
that age of innocence, the thought of user profiling was still far
from the minds of scientists, and was not once broached by any of
the participants or the audience during this workshop.

Validating the results of a series of tests such as those described
above would be almost impossible today since search results for
the same query typically generate tens of thousands of ‘matches’
and since, except for a small fraction, the bulk of these matches
are not accessible. Even in the accessible results, there are still
duplicates since it appears that no attempt is being made to
eliminate these as long as the web servers are not the same and
spurious matches make up the majority of the accessible results.
Many of the URLs link to unexpected pages or third party sites
regardless of whether they have any relevant content.

Many of these trends continue and indeed, most current search
engines auto-correct or suggest completions for queries as they
are being entered by the user, further obscuring and limiting the
choices. The results are ranked giving sponsored links higher
priority and appearing at the top. Since the behaviour evidence of
most users suggests that only the first few pages of results are ever
consulted, there is a further limitation in the subset of available
indexed contents. Despite these drawbacks, search engines are a
rich source of information and many of the ranking algorithms can
be made to generate revenue for these commercial entities.

4. On-line Systems and Privacy

Robots and other such systems have been roving the web to
discover new contents for their respective search engines since the
advent of the Web. The recall and precision of the search engines
as shown above have been variable. While the early academic
search systems and their robots have either been commercialized
or simply retired, others have emerged as a result of venturecapital investment with the aim of harvesting the web for profit.
Not only are these search engines intrusive; some of them may not
respect the Robots Exclusion protocol set up in the early days of
WWW for keeping the robots out of 'private' web space
(implemented via the file robot.txt). Malicious robots and their
creators could use the robots.txt file to locate such restricted
contents.

Another issue is the use and abuse of 'do not track' directives in
the browser (http://donottrack.us). The exact meaning of 'tracking'
is now being questioned. Since web publicity is driven by tracked
data and since the number and the reach of the players involved
are significant, the rewards of continuing to track users renders
any effort at self-regulation or legal oversight more difficult.
It is sometimes said that search engines and on-line systems are
the most daring and successful buccaneers in that they contain
content which is either under copyright or intellectual property
protection. However, in legal actions issuing from these new grey
areas, many judges have held that the owner of the content, by not
opting out, implicitly grants such systems the license to copy the
pages. An analogy might be allowing anyone to walk into one’s
house and remove its content if the door is not locked, the only
difference being that in making a copy of the digital contents, the
original is not 'stolen'.

So for instance, when a legal challenge was brought against one of
these parties for scanning and indexing millions of copyrighted
books without the consent of the copyright holders, such actions
were deemed to be covered by fair use laws. The rationale given
for this was that, since the index could be used to allow the books
to be discovered via the search engines, it is a benefit to society.
Many search engines also cache web pages and their content,
including images, without considering copyright-status, privacy or
related issues. The burden is on the holders of copyrights to
request that such results be removed, and the number of such
requests is said to be in the millions. Provided the system removes
such content flagged by copyrights' holders, current laws
governing copyright actually protect search systems since they are
said to provide merely 'inadvertent' access to such results.

Compared with the penalties faced by ordinary users who share
files (as evidenced by a recent legal proceeding [12]) it seems as
though the courts and legal procedures are being used to scare the
consumer rather than harnessing the emerging technology to make
the contents available at a reasonable price.

The most widely-reported and perhaps most important example of
massive personal data collection occurs across the popular online
social networks (OSN). These sites allow and even encourage
users to post any and all personal information. In spite of
warnings about the risks involved, most users are unaware of
these warnings or how to set the correct permissions and share
settings for their contents.

The search for known persons using their email address is a
feature which helps a user to connect to these persons in an OSN.
This feature is convenient for users to quickly set up their network
of acquaintances and at the same time creates a base for the new
user to which they will frequently return: a commercial advantage
for the OSNs. However, this tool can also be exploited. A
malicious user could query one or more social network sites to
validate a list of e-mail addresses obtained using questionable
sources and databanks. By correlating the data from other sites a
validated list and personal information obtained could be used for
generating bulk personalised messages to be included in phishing
and spam. In [13] the authors show how easy it is to take
advantage of this common weakness. These techniques can be
deployed on a large scale by an attacker to query OSNs for
registered users and mine the results to collect publicly available
personal information about these users. This can then be used for
automated profiling.

The combination of voluntarily posted personal information, its
storage, the tracking of users’ interaction and linkage of data from
various datasets is the core of the privacy problem. Recently, there
have been cases where the OSN deliberately allowed leakage of
personal information [14]. Some of these leaks were fixed only
after negative publicity. Cases of clear misrepresentation about
the privacy and sharing policy required lengthy and expensive
regulatory action [15].

The following is a slightly amended version of the terms of
service (TOS) agreement from an OSN. For the sake of
anonymity, the name of the organization has been replaced by
XXXXX. Except for this change the rest of the text is verbatim.
Since most users do not bother to click the link and read the
agreement, they are not aware of what they are signing away.

Furthermore, this site and most other sites require the user to agree to
allow them to: collect, use, disclose, transfer and store the user’s
information with third parties. (Incidentally, for this site, there is a
conflict of this TOS and the advertised privacy policy!)  You acknowledge
and agree that if you contribute, provide or make available any Content to
the Site ("Your Content"), you hereby grant to XXXXX a non-exclusive,
worldwide, perpetual, irrevocable, royaltyfree, transferable, sublicensable
(through multiple tiers) right and license to use, reproduce, adapt,
modify, distribute, translate, publish, create derivative works based on,
perform, display and otherwise exploit Your Content, in whole or in part,
in any media now known or hereafter developed, for any purpose
whatsoever. You represent and warrant that you have all the rights, power
and authority necessary to grant the foregoing license, and that all Your
Content (i) does not infringe, violate, misappropriate or otherwise
conflict with the rights of any third party, and (ii) complies with all
applicable laws and regulations (foreign and domestic). In addition, Your
Content must be accurate and truthful. XXXXX reserves the right to remove
any of Your Content from the Site at any time if XXXXX believes in its sole
discretion that it does not comply with this TOS. In addition, you agree
that XXXXX may use your name and logo (whether or not you have made it
available through the Site) for the purpose of identifying you as an
existing or past customer of XXXXX both on the Site and in marketing and
promotional materials.

5. Big Data and Privacy

Many of a person's daily activities generate a small amount of
data which is stored and hence could be tracked. Using blogs, and
OSNs, hundreds of millions of individuals knowingly share
personal information with friends and perhaps inadvertently with
strangers. The privacy settings of OSNs and other sites are
usually not clear nor are they being used correctly by users [16].
Furthermore the ubiquity of smart phones and GPS devices
provide up to date location information on many people. These
snippets of personal data from various sources may be linked and
tracked to give a good picture of the person’s movement and
activities, without the person's consent or even knowledge.

Now, the use of the term Big Data varies and, though it is
sometimes used to describe data such as those provided by users,
at other times it is used to describe the analysis of this data. One
usage covers the collection and mining of all new sources of data
that is collected by a single organization. This could include such
things as performance information on inventories or sick days; the
data collection on these and subsequent analysis (mining) can
allow for better management decisions. Before the coinage of the
term Big Data, these features were commonly referred to as data
warehousing and data mining.

With increasing digitization, organizational structures have
evolved to become dependent on the information systems [17].
Without adequate privacy and security structures organizations
become targets for exploitation, whether by hackers, criminals, or
the organization's own employees, and these latter either by
design or by omission. In spite of decades of developments and
expanded resources, information systems are far from secure;
indeed, the risks of cyber-attacks are getting worse [18]. Such
cyber-attacks lead to the disruption of daily operations, loss of
valuable lists, plans or secrets, public humbling and exposure to
fraud.

However, amalgamation of data from multiple heterogeneous
organizations and the use of analysis on this data to create new
interconnections among facts and people well beyond what would
be possible with a single dataset, even a big one, is of concern to
most observers [19]. Such large collections of data not only allow
the perpetrations of new offences but imposes new restrictions on
people’s rights using techniques such as filtering, blocking and
surveillance.

As reported in [20], [21] online identifiers such as IP addresses or
badly anonymized data could be used to derive personal
information. Online interactions produce a trail. These trails are
recorded by internet service providers (ISP) and are retained for a
period of time, ranging from a few weeks to a few months and
even years, despite the lack of any legal requirement to do so.
These traces can be combined with other data relating to the user
to create a profile and thence to identify the person.
The above case illustrates amply that big data can be used to
create individual profiles and exploited for both innocuous and
harmful purposes. It is probable that such derived profiles may not
always be correct or verifiable. The analytics and models used
could use a number of underlying assumptions; some of these
assumptions may have a margin of error or could be outright
erroneous and perhaps not applicable. There is always the chance
of incorrect implementation and software errors. These profiles
may be used for creating inequality and/or discrimination and
deprive entire segments of the population access to services and
products.

In many online applications including OSNs most users are not
aware of the underlying technology being used nor are they aware
about the kind and extent of information that is being collected
and stored, nor for how long. Any consent and agreement entered
into by the user, while protecting the provider, is not always fair
to the consumer; these agreements are written in impossible to
read legalese and most users do not read and/or understand fully
what they are accepting.

One of the paradoxes of Big Data is that it is amalgamated many
times by third parties who aggregate data from various sources;
many times the first party ‘leaks’ these data to a third party [22] in
exchange for payment. Data thus collected are analysed and
reused according to algorithms and heuristics which are far from
transparent, being hidden using legal means by appealing to the
need for commercial secrecy [23]. The identities of the users are
employed for targeted publicity [22]. Unfortunately, awareness of
the practices and methodology used are often obtained only when
whistle blowers expose some of these operations [24].
Many of the most notable objections to the unregulated use of Big
Data have been raised by European nations, who, given their
histories, are perhaps more sensitive than North Americans to
questions of the large scale invasion of privacy [25], [26], [27].
According to this strain of thought, the personal dignity and
integrity of the user is ignored when software processes their
information. Such software, which lacks the social and legal
sensibilities of a human, makes decisions based on aggregated Big
Data taken out of context and has lost all its semantic content. The
general privacy concerns raised by academics, civil libertarians
and lawyers has finally pushed the U.S. in taking a second look at
the privacy issue [28].

In general most users, though they have very little control, are
concerned about how the various data collectors use their personal
information. Most users want to be explicitly asked for consent
before any information is collected and stored. The requirement of
obtaining a specific, informed and explicit time and use limited
consent allows individuals to be in a position to give meaningful
consent. Contrast this with a typical term of use policy that the
user is required to agree to before accessing an on-line service (as
for example the one given in the previous section).

6. Online Systems and the Vulnerable

Many cases of cyberbullying and harassment have been reported
in the popular press. While bullying and harassment obviously
pre-existed the web and OSNs, information technologies such as
text messaging, recording and instant uploading features always
readily accessible by smartphones have provided easy to use and
easy to exploit media. As with older forms of bullying and
harassment, anyone could be a victim of cyberbullying, however,
children and youth are the most common perpetrators and targets
[29].

This use of the online media is of urgent concern of parents,
police and the general population because of its increased
prevalence and the fact that it has been implicated as a significant
factor in a number of recent teen suicides.
In the United States, a special law has been passed, the Children's
Online Privacy Protection Act (COPPA) [30], which is meant to
ensure that children under 13 years of age don't share their
personal information on the Internet without the express approval
of their parents. Since then, however, the dramatic rise in the
number and use of mobile devices among children — according to
some recent estimates up to seven hours a day — has effectively
outdated this law.

Another initiative has been the "safe harbor" provision designed to
encourage increased industry self-regulation [31]. Under this
provision, industry groups and others may ask the U. S. Federal
Trade Commission (FTC) to approve self-regulatory guidelines
that implement children’s privacy protections Companies that
comply with the FTC-approved guidelines receive safe harbor
status. Following a public comment period, the FTC has approved
the kidSAFE Seal Program as a safe harbor program under the
COPPA and the FTC's COPPA Rule [32].

The kidSAFE Seal Program [33] is a private sector product seal of
approval organization similar to the more familiar label such as
UL on many everyday products [34]. The kidsSAfe organization
is in the business of certifying companies and websites geared for
children under 13 as being "kidSafe". Their primary focus is to
review and certify products for "interactive" and "online safety".
However, looking through the approved product list [35] of
kidSAFE Seal Program (Feb 14, 2014), one does not see any of
the currently popular OSNs. These OSNs are, in many cases, the
primary media used in bullying and harassing cases that have been
reported in the news media.

Such programs seem to give a false sense of security to parents
and a sense of satisfaction to politicians and bureaucrats for
having done something. All this has accomplished is to set up
more businesses and an overhead for those other businesses who
seek such seal of approval.

In Canada the current government has proposed an omnibus
criminal bill C-13 popularly called the Cyber-bullying Bill [36]. It
includes provisions for monitoring and recording internet traffic
by ISPs and web sites. While it is evident the society and its law
enforcement machine needs tools to fight online crime and cyber-
bullying and harassment, this must be done without trampling on
people's fundamental rights to privacy. C-13 proposes new
investigative powers and its use by a large number of public
officials is not subject to any requirements of accountability or
reporting mechanism. From a privacy standpoint, the bill is
further appalling since it gives the ISP and telecoms full immunity
to disclose their customers' information without a warrant.

A recent judgment of the Supreme Court of Canada[37] has
effectively put a stop to the practice of internet service providers
(ISP) from providing the coordinates of their subscribers to law
enforcement without a judicial warrant. To date they were
providing this information voluntarily without judicial oversight.
This will put a damper in the legislative progress of bill C-13 and
perhaps illustrates why Canada, unlike U.S.A is in the top 10
democratic nations in the world according to a report from the
Economist Intelligence Unit (http://pages.eiu.com/rs/eiu2/images/
Democracy-Index-2012.pdf).

7. The Concept of Privacy and LegislativeMeasures

One of striking transformation that has accompanied the Big Data
revolution is the way the collection and repurposing of data affect
some of the most basic and fundamental concepts of democratic
societies: the concepts of property, privacy and personhood. These
three concepts are related and, in most legal systems stemming
from the common law tradition — as, for example, the United
Kingdom and Commonwealth countries, as well as the United
States, though by no means limited to these — are rooted in ideas
of the 17th century British philosopher John Locke. The most
elementary concept of property stems from the fact that human
beings are the possessors of their bodies [38]. Now it is on the
basis of this elementary kind of property — one's own body, as
well as its capacities — that all other property is founded. So, as
Locke says, through 'the labour of my body and the work of my
hands' — which are properly mine, I mix myself with nature and
create things in the world or parts of the world that become my
property. These things are not only mine while I am making or
using them but indefinitely. This is what private property means,
and since any property I acquire is property that I have earned
through the labour of my body which is mine, I hold things justly,
and both my moral and legal personhood are tied up with these
things that I have made or done. To be a person is to be the owner
of the things that are mine, or even the things that are me, those
parts of the world I have mixed myself with and made my own.
The concept of property rights has evolved to enable people to
develop as individuals, and exchange fairly in the marketplace.
The notion of copyright evolved from the concept of property
applied to the intangible products of individuals as authors of such
intangibles. Intangible property has the characteristic that it is
sharable using appropriate technology.

What is striking about the Big Data revolution is how little sense
it makes to talk in this way about the labour of our bodies insofar
as that labour is the sharing of data. Because this data is collected,
stored and reused for an indefinite period of time by the
uninitiated applications of second and third parties, it is as though
one does not and even cannot know what parts of the world one is
mixing one’s labour with, and one is utterly unable to lay claim to
the fruits of this labour. This is well expressed in a description
from a report on personal data by the World Economic Forum
[39]. Unlike "the industrial-age model of the “consumer”" or the
producer, "end users are vital and independent stakeholders in the
co-creation and value exchange of services and experiences" [39].
Thus, with this idea of an end-user as a mere co-creator of their
personal data, a shift has occurred in the relations between the
ownership of one’s labour, in the form of data (property), privacy
and the individual (personhood), to create a "new asset class"[39].
Since we are invited to think of personal information as an asset,
indeed, as similar to "money" [39], the notion of that information
as private begins to be eroded. Though one’s money is one’s
private property, the sense of privacy herein is not at all
equivalent to the notion of privacy when we speak of 'private'
data.

Privacy in this sense stems from the right to be left alone, to be
free from being interfered with by others [40]. Privacy is tied to
the concept of the home as the sphere of privacy: a person’s home
is their castle. With the emergence of information technology, the
domain of privacy has expanded to include control of personal
data and how that data is controlled, edited, managed, deleted,
used and communicated [41], [42]. Hence treating personal data
as private property and having control of this property by being
cognizant of the processing used by second and third parties is
one of the legal avenues that is being used by certain legislative
bodies. However, such an approach has issues in ‘marketing’ such
data, providing a framework its legal use and handling of shared
data.

Issues of privacy raised by the processing of personal data have
been addressed by various governments in different ways. In the
European context, privacy is enshrined as a human right. In the
context of data, the EU created in 1995 the Data Protection
directive, a framework to balance privacy and unhindered flow of
information [43]. This directive gives the individual the right to
the data processing analytics used in processing his data [44].
Recently a new directive is under discussion [44]. The salient
feature of this directive expands on responsibility and
accountability, consent, collection and use limitation, adequate
notice of data breaches, right to the deletion of personal data,
access to a copy of personal data, oversight and sanctions.
The spirit of the new European directive is to require that
information systems be designed with paramount importance
given to the protection of privacy by setting the default level of
privacy to high. As in the case of financial institutions, the
directive calls for risk and impact assessment for any failure in the
privacy protection mechanism. Another aspect that is addressed is
the balance between the confidentiality of algorithms used in the
related processing software and the right of the individual to
access the logic of the processing and to manage their profile and
to shape the results generated from their data.

Data protection in the United States is a mix of legislation and
associated regulation which, as pointed out above, relies heavily
on industry self-regulation. While some Americans feel secure
with their data in the hands of self-regulating private enterprises
and most seem to prefer such forms of regulation to those
legislated by their governmental agencies, it is not surprising that
the United States lacks anything resembling the European
directive. There do exist consumer-based efforts to allow users to
'take charge' of their information and deploy it as an asset, sharing
what they wish with corporations to mutual benefit [45] in a way
quite similar to World Economic Forum's treatment of personal
data as a new asset class. Such efforts, however, have limited
ability to take punitive action in the case of data misuse, and, by
leaving regulation in the hands of interested parties, gives only
limited assurances regarding the effectiveness of such oversight.
While examples such as the European directive might have
sharper teeth, it remains unclear whether legislation emerging
from such directives would close the gap between rights of
corporations to collect and mine data and the rights of individuals
to maintain ownership of their personhood in the sense of being
able to 'manage their identity' [46].

8. Defensive Measures

In spite of these privacy concerns, most internet users are content
with the status quo. Recognizing that it is not possible to turn back
the clock, and unwilling to wait for legislation to have more
transparency and accountability, other users have opted to take
matter in their own hands. The best course of action is to be
cognizant of the terms of service and the privacy policy of any
online system before starting to use it. If more people take this
fairly simple precaution and avoid sites that post TOS conditions
like the ones given above, these sites would consider making
changes. After all, they are not online for charity nor are their
services free. If this was the case, they would not have become
what they are today!

There are a number of add-ons and plug-ins that can be used with
the open-source independent Firefox browser. Some of the
popular Firefox add-ons are given in Table 4. Some of these
promote quicker loading of web pages, since for example ads are
blocked; however this can come at the expense of quality and
functionality. Unfortunately a single plug-in is not able to fully
address all known privacy threats. Users who are concerned about
higher online privacy, tend to install a number of add-ons.
However, this in turn may lead to conflicts and likely slow
loading as the browser loads and interacts with multiple add-ons.
For example, adding NoScript may make a web site unusable
unless the site is allowed to run scripts at least temporarily. Sites
that are used frequently, for example a banking site, should be
white-listed. Use and tune up of these add-ons clearly requires
effort and understanding. A case in point is the use of AdBlock,
which blocks frames; the solution calls for the user to configure
AdBlock to allow frames from trusted sites as shown in Figure 3.
Finding and installing such configuration setting is beyond the
capability of most users.

Because these add-ons require a further user action, only a small
fraction of Firefox users have installed these to date; the most
popular being ad-blockers though for the purposes of this article
add-ons for proprietary browsers have been left out of account. A
detailed experiment using some of the existing add-ons is reported
in [47].
When visiting a site, one can use the Ghostery’s option to find out
what type of trackers are running on the web page and the cookies
involved” These include advertising trackers used to deliver ads;
analytics trackers which does the analysis for the web site
publishers; beacons used for sharing information among sites;
privacy trackers allow privacy policies. Widgets provide page
functionalities, OSN buttons and comment forms.
would be available outside the EU; this seems to be contrary to
the spirit of the ruling. [50]

Editorial response to this ruling was a specter of censorship; this
is incomprehensible considering the fact that the search engine
operators constantly censor results showing only a tiny fraction of
the matches and giving prominence and higher priority to results
that are most economically rewarding for the operators. These
editors are either not cognizant of this selection practice or are
ignoring it. Neither alternative is very flattering.

9.2 British Columbia Class Action Suit

Unfortunately, these defensive mechanisms are simply not within
the technical capacity of the vast majority of users, and in any
case, proprietary browsers may block the use of any such safeguards, while other websites may find ways to work around them.
Safeguards on mobile devices are, at the moment, even more
difficult to implement.

9. Recent Developments

Since the paper was written for the triple blind review just a few
months ago, there have been several developments, some of
which are reported here.

9.1 European court ruling on right to be forgotten

On May 13, 2014, a press release from the Court of Justice of the
European Union (ECJ) in Luxembourg noted the following:
“An internet search engine operator is responsible for the
processing that it carries out of personal data which appear on
web pages published by third parties

Thus, if, following a search made on the basis of a person’s name,
the list of results displays a link to a web page which contains
information on the person in question, that data subject may
approach the operator directly and, where the operator does not
grant his request, bring the matter before the competent
authorities in order to obtain, under certain conditions, the
removal of that link from the list of results” [48]

This ruling means that search engines operators can be required to remove
data that are "inadequate, irrelevant or no longer relevant, or excessive
in relation to the purposes for which they were processed and in the light
of the time that has elapsed," said judges at the Luxembourg-based
court. The ECJ noted, “the data subject’s rights also override, as a
general rule, that interest of internet users”. [49] 

The initial response of the defendant in this case was reluctance to
comply; when a competitor acted, the defendant published an online form for
link removal requests with the caveat that the results

A British Columbia (BC) woman in Vancouver is instrumental in setting in
motion a class action suit [51] against an OSN which used her name and/or
image, without permission, in a “sponsored” ads to her on-line friends. The
judge in allowing the suit to go ahead in BC ruled as follows ".. with the
creation and growth of the internet the potential implications for a loss
of privacy are greater than ever. The difficulty in proving quantifiable
damage remains great for an individual whose privacy is lost, but the
social harm can be monumental if the loss of privacy includes publicity
over the internet with its almost infinite reach and timelessness. I
conclude that the legislative conferral of exclusive jurisdiction on this
Court for claims under the Privacy Act evidences both a legislative
intention to override any forum selection clause to the contrary, and a
strong public policy reason for not enforcing the Forum Selection Clause. I
conclude that the plaintiff has shown strong cause why the Forum Selection
Clause should not cause this Court to decline jurisdiction….” [52]


Regardless of the outcome of such legal actions, it involves a long and
expensive emotional draining experience to come to any conclusion and such
legal actions have to be repeated in all jurisdictions. The problem is the
assumption used by these multinational corporations to assume that opting
in is automatic and that legal action must be taken in their preferred
domestic courts, which tend to change from one TOS to another. Legal
framework must allow users to opt in, selectively, for various features and
the default is not to assume to be opted in. Multinational operating and
generating global revenue must comply with the jurisdiction of their users
and any dispute must be in the forum of the user.

9.3 Meanwhile in the U. S. of A

Data about users are collected at many points and there is an
economic dimension to all this data as illustrated by some random
users experiments reported recently [53]. The USA has been
struggling over two decades examining data brokers which are
companies that collect and resell personal information about
consumers. Alas, little has been achieved in improving
transparency and control by consumers. It is claimed that these
brokers provide benefits to consumers; however, it is clear that the
sought after benefits are to the businesses using the consumer data
to improve their profitability. The report [54] recommends that
legislation be considered to give data subjects access to their data
and provide an option to ‘opt out’ of having their data used for
marketing purposes. The opting out option seems ridiculous; the
default should be ‘opt out’ and ‘opt in’ should be the option!

It is reported recently that the US Department of Homeland
Security is looking for software to automatically detect sarcasm in
on line postings. [55]

10. The way ahead

When one compares the efforts expended and results obtained by
the typical privacy settings of many OSNs, it is evident that they
lag far behind what has been done for security. One reason is
because security is tied to the concept of property, whereas
privacy is an unknown area and it is considered to be subjective.
Courts and the regulators have been too lenient on corporations
who have abused consumer data and infringed on their privacy.
Requests to remove objectionable content are frequently framed in
terms of censorship, and since these data controlling corporations
have deep pockets, ordinary consumers are often discouraged by
the hurdles faced when attempting to reassert control over their
data trails, and in the most tragic cases, seem to feel that the only
way of dissociating themselves from their surrendered data is to
resort to drastic measures. Another line of reasoning advanced
against taking punitive action is that such actions would stifle
innovation. The result of these kinds of reasoning is that, to the
best of the published reports accessible by this author, not one
corporate director or executive (including the now common Chief
Information Officer) has been held accountable and been
incarcerated for such misrepresentation and misuse. Finally, since
every attempt to apply the regulations is contested, lawsuits
stemming from abuse of privacy are frequently settled out of court
[56].

Protecting the privacy of internet and mobile device users is an
urgent issue that needs the attention of the database community.
Some have argued that end users (data subjects) have a legitimate
stake in the collection of their data by third parties [57]. It is clear
that self-regulation has not proven adequately effective in
protecting privacy and security on the web. The intent of the Big
Data collection and analyses is to identify the user, create a profile
so as to tailor publicity to that user. The add-ons to browsers such
as the “Do Not Track” directive could be easily ignored. Thus,
measures to enforce strict adherence to regulation must be
strengthened to allow ordinary data subjects to verify if these
directives are being respected both to the letter and the spirit.
Since the internet and web were initially developed for the sharing
of data by a limited number of responsible researchers and some
others, there was not much concern in those days about privacy
and security. Even though the user base has expanded
astronomically and is now much more diverse, the initial, 'wild
west-like' security and privacy atmosphere largely remains to this
day. Generally speaking, not enough thought is put into privacy
and security issues. Software systems are rushed through the
production line, even when they exhibit numerous design and
security flaws; indeed, many of these software products include,
as part of their design, trapdoors which are purposely or
inadvertently left in in release versions. All these flaws are
evidenced by the number and frequency of retroactively released
security patches and upgrades which must be added on to software
that has been pre-bundled when purchasing personal devices.

The database community has been responsible for creating the
data mining tools that power the Big Data revolution. This
community must also take an active role in creating tools and
analysis techniques to help users(data subjects) deal with the
complexity of permission-settings and make it easier for users to
ensure that online providers ‘forget’ their data, while sensibly
limiting the kinds of analysis and profiling that can be done.
Though tools such as FourthParty [58] exist, their use is beyond
the capability of a large segment of users. Further, tools to analyse
the data being gathered should be developed. Also, better use of
privacy substitutes must be instituted. An example of a privacy
substitute is the old ‘stamp’ type loyalty program. Such programs
were more privacy preserving than their replacement by the
current loyalty programs which require recording of all
transactions and which can be used for profiling and tracking.
The right of a data subjects to their data must be respected
regardless of the method by which the data is obtained. Hence
data subjects should be given meaningful and understandable
warnings about whether and how their data is being collected and
stored, and companies should obtain clear consent from
responsible parties for such collection and use. Finally, data
subjects must have the right to ask the deletion of all data by
which they can be identified directly or indirectly. Any regulation
aimed at protecting user privacy must be clearly written and
parties providing content as well as third parties must adhere to
these regulations; and then not only to the letter but also the spirit
of the regulations and laws. A recent law passed in the lower
house of the Brazilian legislature [59] illustrates an example of
what may be coming.

Websites and social media providers should work harder to
publicize their contact information and ensure speedier responses
to and adjudication of all objections raised by affected parties. It is
in their interest to encourage the creation and maintenance of an
ongoing independent oversight organization (ombudsman) that
will have moral suasion as well as legal powers of enforcement,
including the right to remove objectionable content. Such an
oversight organization must include representatives from local
populations and must not have any conflict of interests.
There is a need to develop privacy enhancing technology to
provide open models and algorithms by the database community.
In light of the fact that most users may not be able to understand
the analytics used in processing their data, technologies have to be
developed to make such analytics transparent and allow the data
to be coded so that it is clearly visible as to who can access what
data and for what purpose. Visualization of such for ordinary
mortals is yet another avenue of research.
One of the reviewers of this triple-blind paper suggested that some
solutions be offered; hence some ideas which this author would
like to place, for all they are worth, in the public domain so to
avoid a rush to patent these obvious solutions for private gain

Default Opt-out Paradigm.

This will require the consumers to be savvier and impose some
reins on the on-line buccaneers with deep pockets.
Data brokers have had an unrestricted field to exploit personal
public and not so public data for private gain. Many pre-prepared
contracts such as the TOS quoted above leave no possibility to opt
out or allow a selection of level of opt-in. The benefits to the
consumers, claimed to be derived by deep mining of personal data
without the consent of the persons concerned, are of dubious
validity. What the targeted ads and recommendations do is to
create spam not only in emails but also on the web. Such spams
waste time and are polluting in more than one sense.

Some legal remedy such as the anti-spam law (http://lawslois.justice.gc.ca/eng/acts/E-1.6/index.html) that is to come into
force in Canada on July 1, 2014 would regulate commercial email
messages originating from commercial entities within the
Canadian jurisdiction. Messages could only be sent to those who
have opted in. There is a need for some regulation with real teeth
in the international arena. Solutions proposed by search engines to
limit the requests for the right to be forgotten only to the
jurisdiction in question is an insult to the spirit of the request and
fairness. The right to be forgotten should extend to archived data
and propagated data from the source of the data. The later
requires the obligatory maintenance of a data propagation trail
which can be used for accountability and audit.

Term of Service Agreements.

Many terms of service(use) agreements are lengthy, in small fonts
and comprised of many sections over many articles. Most internet
users have no time to read or understand all implications.
Suggestions to users is to decline any TOS that looks remotely
like the one quoted above hoping that the sites which use such
draconian TOS will wake up and count the number of declines
and act on it. Furthermore, there must be the right to be forgotten
and clearing up of archives and propagated data from services
such as cited above. Legal requirements for a mandatory expiry
of stored data must be enacted and enforced.

Sharing and Privacy Option

A clear picture of what is being shared and what are the privacy
options of each piece of personal information on web site of OSN
and other on-line sites that a consumer uses should be provided.
Features such as meaning of each privacy and sharing feature
must be clearly shown using graphics whenever possible.

End User Initiated Data Rental and New Genre of Data Brokers

A new trend could be to empower the data subject (end user) to
collect data at his/her end; then using appropriate anonymous
identification rent such data to a new genre of data brokers. The
data would be the property of the data subject; and who can
terminate the rental agreement at any time. These new genre of
data brokers would have to be more responsible in allowing the
data subject to withdraw his bank of data at any time.
Unless the current open source browsers develop features to easily
audit cookies and allow easy means of blocking cookies and
analytics by default, there is an urgent need to develop open
source browsers, which are designed for protecting personal
information. If the data generated by the user is to be reclaimed,
the browser must help in limiting the leakage of personal
information and optionally put it under the control of the data
object rather than third parties and data brokers.
These and other concrete steps are necessary to ensure that this
new digital age which we are entering, the Age of Big Data, does
not, despite all of the bright lights of its manifold screens, descend
into a dark age.

11. Acknowledgments

The author likes to acknowledge the valuable discussions with and the
contribution of Drew Desai (Univ. of Ottawa); also, those of many
researchers cited and perhaps missed; these have been valuable in preparing
this article. All the ideas for short- and longterm solutions are, for what
they are worth, hereby placed in the public domain away from the danger of being patented by greedy
corporations and their CEOs. As we know, ideas are the ones that
could be implemented. Unfortunately, most patents usurp ideas
for private gain instead of public good

12. References

[1] "Data, data everywhere" The Economist, Special Report,
February 27, 2010.

[2] James Gleick, The Information: a History, a Theory, a Flood.
Pantheon, New York, 2011.

[3] http://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/1945/07/as-wemay-think/303881/

[4] A Little History of the World Wide Web,
http://www.w3.org/History.html

[5] Bipin C. Desai, ``Report of the Navigation Issues Workshop'',
Computer Networks and ISDN Systems, Vol. 27-2, November
1994, pp. 332-333. (Earlier version available from:
http://users.encs.concordia.ca/~bcdesai/web-publ/navigationissues.html)

[6] Robert Caillau, Bipin C. Desai, ``Report of the Priorities
Workshop'', Computer Networks and ISDN Systems, Vol. 27-2,
November 1994, pp. 334-336. (Earlier version available from:
http://users.encs.concordia.ca/~bcdesai/web-publ/priorityissues.html)

[7] Bipin C. Desai, (ed) ``Proceedings of the WWW III Workshop
on Web-wide Indexing/Semantic Header or Cover Page'',
Darmstadt, Germany, April 1995, also
http://www.igd.fhg.de/www/www95/proceedings/workshops/works
hop-A/workshop-A.ps

[8] Bipin C. Desai, ``Indexing and Searching Virtual Libraries'',
An invited refereed white paper prepared for the CIC-Forum on
'America in the Age of Information', in Compendium of Draft
White Papers, Bethesda, MD, July, 1995, pp. 87-90,
http://users.encs.concordia.ca/~bcdesai/web-publ/www3wrkA/workshop-a.html

[9] http://users.encs.concordia.ca/~bcdesai/test-of-indexsystems.html

[10] http://users.encs.concordia.ca/~bcdesai/test-of-indexsystems-revisited.html

[11] http://users.encs.concordia.ca/~bcdesai/rerevisit.pdf

[12] TekSavvy ordered to ID alleged movie downloaders
http://www.cbc.ca/news/technology/teksavvy-ordered-to-idalleged-movie-downloaders-1.2546477

[13] Marco Balduzzi, Christian Platzer, Thorsten Holz, Engin
Kirda, Davide Balzarotti, and Christopher Kruegel, “Abusing
Social Networks for Automated User Profiling” Research Report
RR-10-233 - March 3, 2010

[14] Emily Steel, Jessica E. Vascellaro “Facebook, MySpace
Confront Privacy Loophole”, Wall Street Journal, May 21, 2010
available
at:
http://online.wsj.com/article/SB100014240527487045131045752
56701215465596.html

[15] “Myspace Settles FTC Charges That It Misled Millions of
Users About Sharing Personal Information with Advertisers”,
May 8, 2012, http://ftc.gov/opa/2012/05/myspace.shtm

[16] Yabing Liu, Krishna P. Gummadi, Balachander
Krishnamurthy, Alan Mislove, “Analyzing Facebook Privacy
Settings: User Expectations vs. Reality”, Proceedings of IMC
2011, November 2011

[17] Risk and responsibility in a hyper connected world:
Implications for enterprises, Jan 2014,
http://www.mckinsey.com/insights/business_technology/risk_and
_responsibility_in_a_hyperconnected_world_implications_for_ent
erprises

[18] Hackers Took Sneaky Path Into Target Customers’ Wallets
http://www.forbes.com/sites/moneybuilder/2014/01/24/this-weekin-credit-card-news-how-thieves-hacked-target-danger-of-using-adebit-card/

[19] Balachander Krishnamurthy, Konstantin Naryshkin, Craig
Wills, “Privacy leakage vs. Protection measures: the growing
disconnect”, Web 2.0 Security and Privacy Workshop, May 2011

[20] A Face Is Exposed for AOL Searcher No. 4417749,
http://www.nytimes.com/2006/08/09/technology/09aol.html?page
wanted=all

[21] Balachander Krishnamurthy and Craig Wills “On the
Leakage of Personally Identifiable Information Via Online Social
Networks”, Proceedings of ACM SIGCOMM Workshop on
Online Social Networks, August 2009

[16] Yabing Liu, Krishna P. Gummadi, Balachander
Krishnamurthy, Alan Mislove, “Analyzing Facebook Privacy
Settings: User Expectations vs. Reality”, Proceedings of IMC
2011, November 2011

[22] Jonathan R. Mayer, John C. Mitchell, “Third-Party Web
Tracking: Policy and Technology’, Proc. IEEE Symposium on
Security and Privacy, 2012, also available from:
https://cyberlaw.stanford.edu/files/publication/files/trackingsurvey
12.pdf

[23] Neil M. Richards, Jonathan H. King, “Three Paradoxes of
Big data”, in Big Data and Privacy, Making End Meet, Stanford,
CA, Sept, 2013, pp102-105

[24] The NSA Files, http://www.theguardian.com/world/the-nsafiles

[25] A Acquisti, “The Economics of Personal Data and the
Economics of Privacy”, 2010,
http://www.oecd.org/sti/ieconomy/46968784.pdf

[26] “The 2013 OECD Privacy Guidelines”,
http://www.oecd.org/sti/ieconomy/2013-oecd-privacyguidelines.pdf

[27] Peter Leonard , “Big Data Analytics: Evolving Business
Models and Global Privacy Regulation”, Making End Meet,
Stanford, CA, Sept, 2013, pp.65-69

[28] New York Times Editorial Board, “A Second Front in the
Privacy Wars”,
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/02/24/opinion/a-second-front-inthe-privacy-wars.html?hp&rref=opinion

[29] Cyberbullying and the Non-consensual Distribution of
Intimate Images, Report to the Federal/Provincial/Territorial
Ministers Responsible for Justice and Public Safety, June 2013,
ISBN 978-1-100-23118-1

[30] http://www.ftc.gov/news-events/media-resources/protectingconsumer-privacy/kids-privacy-coppa

[31] http://www.ftc.gov/news-events/press-releases/2013/09/ftcseeks-public-comment-kidsafe%E2%80%99s-proposed-safeharbor-program

[32] http://www.ftc.gov/news-events/press-releases/2014/02/ftcapproves-kidsafe-safe-harbor-program

[33] (http://www.kidsafeseal.com/aboutourprogram.html)

[34] http://www.ul.com another business

[35] http://www.kidsafeseal.com/certifiedproducts.html

[36] An Act to amend the Criminal Code, the Canada Evidence
Act, the Competition Act and the Mutual Legal Assistance in
Criminal Matters Act, available at:
http://www.parl.gc.ca/HousePublications/Publication.aspx?Langu
age=E&Mode=1&DocId=6311444

[37] http://scc-csc.lexum.com/scc-csc/scccsc/en/item/14233/index.do

[38] John Locke, Two Treatises on Government [1693],
Everyman's Library

[39] World Economic Forum, "Personal Data: The Emergence of
a New Asset Class", January 2011. http://www3.weforum.org/
docs/WEF_ITTC_PersonalDataNewAsset_Report_2011.pdf

[40] S. Warre, L. Brandeis, “The Right to Privacy”, Harvard Law
Review, 4-5, pp 193-220.

[41] Alan F. Westin, Privacy and Freedom, The Bodley Head,
London, 1967

[42] Alan F. Westin, Michael A. Baker, Databanks in a free
society, Quadrangle Books, Chicago, 1972

[43] “OECD Guidelines on the Protection of Privacy and
Transborder Flows of Personal Data”
http://www.oecd.org/sti/ieconomy/oecdguidelinesontheprotecti
onofprivacyandtransborderflowsofpersonaldata.htm

[44] Niel van Dijk, “Property, privacy and personhood in a world
of ambient intelligence”, Ethic and Information Technology, 12-1,
pp57-69

[45] Doc Searls, The Intention Economy: When Customers Take
Charge, Boston: Harvard Business Review Press, 2012.

[46] Ira Rubinstein, "Big Data: The End of Privacy or a New
Beginning?", International Data Privacy Law, 2013, pp. 1-14,
http://idpl.oxfordjournals.org/content/early/2013/01/24/idpl.ips03
6.full.pdf

[47] Delfina Malandrino, et al. "Privacy Awareness about
Information Leakage: Who knows what about me?", Proceedings
of the Workshop on Privacy in the Electronic Society, November
2013 available from
http://www2.research.att.com/~bala/papers/wpes13.pdf

[48]http://curia.europa.eu/jcms/upload/docs/application/pdf/201405/cp140070en.pdf

[49] http://www.cbc.ca/news/technology/google-must-respectright-to-be-forgotten-1.2641000

[50] http://bits.blogs.nytimes.com/2014/05/30/google-takes-stepsto-comply-with-right-to-be-forgotten-ruling/?_php=true&_type
=blogs&_r=0

[51] http://www.cbc.ca/news/ canada/british-columbia/facebookclass-action-lawsuit-launched-by-vancouver-woman-1.2660461

[52]https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/1175641-judgegriffin-re-douez-v-facebook-inc-05-30.html

[53] http://www.bbc.com/future/story/20140509-how-much-isyour-facebook-worth

[54] http://www.ftc.gov/system/files/documents/reports/databrokers-call-transparency-accountability-report-federal-tradecommission-may-2014/140527databrokerreport.pdf

[55] US Secret Service seeks Twitter sarcasm detector
http://www.bbc.com/news/technology-27711109

[56] Deliberation No. 2013-420 of the Sanctions Committee of
CNIL imposing a financial penalty against Google Inc. available
from: http://www.cnil.fr/fileadmin/documents/en/D2013420_Google_Inc_EN.pdf

[57] Justin Brookman, G. S. Hans, “Why Surveillance Matters;
Surveillance as a De Facto Privacy Harm”, Big Data and
Privacy, Making End Meet, Stanford, CA, Sept, 2013, pp. 11-13

[58] http://fourthparty.info/

[59] The net closes: Brazil’s magna carta for the web,
http://www.economist.com/news/americas/21599781-brazilsmagna-carta-web-net-closes

